.github/patches/extensions/README.md, before:

# Extension patches
Patches in this directory are used to smoothen the process of introducing changes to DuckDB that break compatibility with an
out-of-tree extension. Extensions installed from git urls can automatically apply patches found in this directory. The APPLY_PATCHES flag 
should be used to explicitly enable this feature. For example,
lets say our extension config looks like this:

```shell
duckdb_extension_load(spatial
    DONT_LINK
    GIT_URL https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb_spatial
    GIT_TAG f577b9441793f9170403e489f5d3587e023a945f
    APPLY_PATCHES
)
```
In this example, upon downloading the spatial extension, all patches in the `.github/patches/extensions/spatial/*.patch`
will be automatically applied.

Note that the reason for having the APPLY_PATCHES flag explicitly enabled is to make it easier for developers reading
the extension config to detect a patch is present. For this reason, the patching mechanism will actually fail if `APPLY_PATCHES`
is set with no patches in `.github/patches/extensions/<ext>/*.patch`.

# Workflow
Imagine a change to DuckDB is introduced that breaks compatibility with extension X. The
workflow for this is as follows:

### PR #1: breaking change to DuckDB
1. Commit breaking change to DuckDB
2. Git clone extension.
3. In DuckDB repo, go to .github/config/extensions/your_extension.cmake
4. If APPLY_PATCHES is not set in duckdb_extension_load, set it.
5. In cloned extension, checkout the GIT_TAG from the your_extension.cmake file.
6. In cloned extension, apply existing patches found in .github/patches/extensions
    ```bash 
    git apply [path to duckdb]/.github/patches/extensions/[your_extension]/fix.patch
    ```
7. Make necessary changes to extension.
8. Generate diff in cloned extension, and forward it to the original fix.patch location (or create the directory if it does not exist):
    ```bash
    git diff > [path to duckdb]/.github/patches/extensions/[your_extension]/fix.patch

9. Commit patch in `.github/patches/extensions/[your_extension]/*.patch` using a descriptive name

If the change is very minor, and you are confident everything will build, you can skip the next two steps.  

### PR #2: patch to extension X
- Apply (all) the patch(es) in `.github/patches/extensions/x/*.patch` to extension X.

### PR #3: update extension X in DuckDB
- Remove patches in `.github/patches/extensions/x/*.patch`
- Remove `APPLY_PATCHES` flag from config
- Update hash of extension in config

Commit message:

clarify workflow for extension patching

.github/patches/extensions/README.md, after:

# Extension patches
Patches in this directory are used to smoothen the process of introducing changes to DuckDB that break compatibility with an
out-of-tree extension. Extensions installed from git urls can automatically apply patches found in this directory. The APPLY_PATCHES flag 
should be used to explicitly enable this feature. For example,
lets say our extension config looks like this:

```shell
duckdb_extension_load(spatial
    DONT_LINK
    GIT_URL https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb_spatial
    GIT_TAG f577b9441793f9170403e489f5d3587e023a945f
    APPLY_PATCHES
)
```
In this example, upon downloading the spatial extension, all patches in the `.github/patches/extensions/spatial/*.patch`
will be automatically applied.

Note that the reason for having the APPLY_PATCHES flag explicitly enabled is to make it easier for developers reading
the extension config to detect a patch is present. For this reason, the patching mechanism will actually fail if `APPLY_PATCHES`
is set with no patches in `.github/patches/extensions/<ext>/*.patch`.

# Workflow
Imagine a change to DuckDB is introduced that breaks compatibility with extension X. The
workflow for this is as follows:

### PR #1: breaking change to DuckDB
1. Commit breaking change to DuckDB
2. Git clone extension.
3. In DuckDB repo, go to .github/config/extensions/your_extension.cmake
4. If APPLY_PATCHES is not set in duckdb_extension_load, set it.
5. In cloned extension, checkout the GIT_TAG from the your_extension.cmake file.
6. In cloned extension, apply existing patches found in .github/patches/extensions
    ```bash 
    git apply [path to duckdb]/.github/patches/extensions/[your_extension]/fix.patch
    ```
7. Make necessary changes to extension.
8. Generate diff in cloned extension, and forward it to the original fix.patch location (or create the directory if it does not exist):
    ```bash
    git diff > [path to duckdb]/.github/patches/extensions/[your_extension]/fix.patch

9. Commit patch in `.github/patches/extensions/[your_extension]/*.patch` using a descriptive name

### If the changes you made are very minor, you can skip the next two steps. (PR #2, PR #3) 

The next two steps are for the following scenarios: 

1. You are the extension developer, and either the changes are big, or the patches have accumulated and you want to 
bump the extension. 
2. You are not the extension developer, but the changes to the extension are big so you should follow the next two steps
so that it is not so cumbersome for the extension developer to bump the extension.

### PR #2: patch to extension X
- Apply (all) the patch(es) in `.github/patches/extensions/x/*.patch` to extension X.

### PR #3: update extension X in DuckDB
- Remove patches in `.github/patches/extensions/x/*.patch`
- Remove `APPLY_PATCHES` flag from config
- Update hash of extension in config
